---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Overview

Across the vibrant ecosystem of OKP4, participants can choose from several different functional roles in the protocol - depending on their technical skills, risk tolerance, desired activity level and resources at their disposal. In this section we will quickly introduce you to the various roles in just a few words, for more details please select the following sections.

<br/>

***Blockchain Layer Participants***

Validators: Validator can self-bond KNOW to increase their probability to validate a block and get rewards. They also have an obligation to vote on the DAO's proposals

Delegators: Stakeholders can delegate their KNOW tokens to validator nodes in order to collect rewards. Their votes are automatically delegated to validators with the tokens; can be changed manually.

DAO participants: Protocol governance. Anyone with staked KNOW tokens can participate in on-chain governance. It is possible to make a proposal and vote on a proposal.

<br/>

***Data Spaces Participants***

Data providers: It is someone who deposits one or more datasets on the protocol so that builders can use it to create knowledge. They are paid for the use of their dataset.

Algorithm & Infrastructure providers: It is someone who deposits an algorithm, a service, or any other processing or calculation software that requires a working time. It is thanks to them that data sets can be assembled and processed to create knowledge. They are paid on an hourly rate.

Builders: They are the creators of knowledge. They contribute to the functioning of the network by creating knowledge thanks to the data and algorithms/infrastructure deposited by the providers.

Curators: Curators can stake KNOW tokens on data and algorithms/infrastructure (not necessarily hiw own) to increase visibility and trust, as well as to obtain a portion of the income generated by this algorithm/data (if applied by the owner).

Governors: Each Data Space can have its own governance mechamisms. Some will choose to have a governance token, some not. The rules are open.
